+++
date = 2019-01-22T00:00:00.000Z
title = "Intro - Flutter in Practice Video Tutorial"
description = """
Introduction to Flutter in Practice, a free programming course that teaches how to write a mobile application using Flutter framework and Dart programming language.
"""
[taxonomies]
topics = [ "Flutter", "Dart" ]
[extra]
number = "00"
video_id = "MbUey9oquuU"
+++

Hi my name is Zaiste and welcome to my Flutter in Practice video tutorial. In
this course I'll be doing something less common: instead of teaching you
concepts and ideas, we will together, step by step, build an actual application.
Something « real » whatever that means as programming is so abstract.

My idea is to go with you through the whole process of developing a "real"
application with all of the ups and downs. And the goal of this course is to
make yet another email client. So what is Flutter.

Flutter is a framework for building mobile applications, created at Google. You
can develop both Android and iOS mobile applications, which means that it is a
so-called « cross-platform solution ». You develop it once with a single
codebase written using a single programming language called Dart. Instead of
using Swift for iOS and Java or Kotlin for Android.

And the result is a native application, either Android or iOS. Flutter compiles
your code directly to the machine code. What’s important about Flutter is that
you can, not only use a single programming language to target both of those
platforms (iOS & Android), but you also have a unified development process,
which means that you use a single set of tools, a single toolchain to work with
both of these platforms.

Flutter abstracts the interaction with both Android & iOS while still producing
native code. Simply put, you don’t need to learn different ways of writing
mobile applications for different mobile platforms.This is similar to React
Native, but Flutter’s advantage is that the framework, the programming language
and the toolchain are developed by single company while still being open source.

This way Flutter is just easier and more pleasant to work with. There is less of
rough edges and most of the pieces needed for development fit nicely. You don’t
need to configure too much to get started or to be productive as you write your
applications.

Dart is an interesting programming language. It's object oriented with inferred
types, which means that you don't have to always specify type. The language or
the compiler is able to guess the type based on the usage Dart reminds me of my
early days working with Turbo Pascal and Delphi. There is no WOW effect here for
sure. It seems boring, or maybe I should say conservative But there is something
in it: Dart evolves each day - its development is very active.

I've chosen an email client as the goal for this course because I am very
enthusiastic about JMAP: this new, modern standard for email clients. The client
we are going to build will exclusively support JMAP protocol.

I will putting a lot of other technical ingredients to the mix to make this
course as close to the actual software development experience as possible. The
focus is on creating a mobile application using Flutter, but we will also do
some backend programming. I will show you how to interact with a RESTful API and
maybe even with a GraphQL endpoint. There will be also some database design.

This course is aimed for absolute beginners or people new to programming. I will
be using simple English, trying to avoid any jargon as much as possible. I will
be also trying to incorporate some funny analogies for clarity. Don't be
surprised if it won't be always precise or correct. I hope more experienced
people will excuse me for this kind of shortcuts.

Both Flutter and Dart are new to me. It is not impossible that I will explain
some of those things incorrectly. On the flip side, I have been programming my
whole life. I have a Computer Science degree. I specialised in AI primarily
working in the field of natural language processing. I decided to record this
course because of the excitement I had working with both Flutter and Dart.

This course is free. The code will be open source. On top of that, I hope I will
be able to engage some of you to contribute to the project as well This way I
will give a tiny glimpse of work needed to maintain and manage an open source
project.

Any feedback at any point is appreciated. The content, the structure - it's all
up to you. Let me know your thoughts, ideas, criticism as well. I hope you will
enjoying watching this as much as I enjoy doing it.

Let's start the adventure.


